if you take a look and I've done surveys
in the US Britain and Canada it's the
public in all three societies leans
about two to one against what I would
call the woke position and that could be
teaching kids that Canada is a racist
country or um you know that there are
many genders or whatever so it's roughly
two to one against across 50 questions
let's say in a democracy the Democracy
gets to set the curriculum I think the
majority of the population would be on
board the idea of political neutrality
and balance as they see it and I think
we have the numbers to to Institute that
now and me one of my pleas is that the
conservative politicians really need to
upgrade the focus on
[Music]
culture hello
everybody I have the opportunity today
to talk to Dr Eric Peter Kaufman he's a
Canadian author and a professor from the
University of Buckingham he's written a
new book it's come out in two different
forms the third awokening or taboo how
making race sacred produced a cultural
revolution Eric is also the author of a
number of other books shall the
religious inherit the earth the rise and
fall of Anglo America the Orange Order
Etc um he's a rare bird you might say
he's a relatively conservative social
scientist and uh there aren't very many
of those in fact I think the two of us
talking are about the only two that
there are that's a bit of an
exaggeration but not much we talk about
a lot of things today we we talk about
the sacred dimension of the victim
victimizer narrative we talk about the
state of modern universities and what's
being done to what would you say stem
the tide of the radical leftists we talk
about Dr
Kaufman's what his Pres assumtion that
much of what's happening on the culture
War Front isn't precisely due to the
invasion of marxists that you often hear
about or even about postmodernism per se
but more about uh Progressive literalism
with its with its roots in the early
20th century and so he makes that case
we talk about sex and the different
political beliefs that are emerging
especially between men and young women
join us for the
conversation you're concentrating on the
culture War which continues to rage
madly especially in well Academia and
everything it touches do you want to
tell I thought we'd start with two
things do you want to tell people why
you entitled your new book The Third
awokening and then maybe fill everybody
in a little bit about your the history
you've had with Council culture and
Academia and how that ties in with your
broader your broader body of
work yeah Jordan it's great to be on the
show and yeah I've got a new book the
third awoke in the title in Britain is
called taboo um and what this book
really is about what it really argues is
that what we're seeing cancel culture
for example attacks on the past on on
History this is actually uh a
continuation and an acceleration of a
pre-existing set of ideas it is not a a
deviation from this well there are
people who will say everything was fine
in the 2000s and suddenly we've had this
post 2015 deviation my argument is
actually no uh what we're seeing is a is
is really a continuation of a set of
ideas which arguably go back a century
uh and so these are the ideas really of
left liberalism and we have to
understand ourselves as living within an
acceleration of left liberalism a set of
ideas that kind of come together in the
first decade of the 20th century uh as
liberal progressivism um people like
John Dewey Jane Adams in the United
States the or Orin of pluralism the
origins of the critique of ethnic
majorities and national
identity and and then this is sort of
accelerated and every generation but
really from the late 1960s we get a sort
of takeoff and then we've kind of had
with social media another acceleration
and so the third awokening simply means
that we're not in the first one that
that we've had three of these uh
emotional outbursts and and ideological
Awakenings just like in Protestant ISM
you have the first and second great
Awakenings in American protestantism
these are sort of emotional upsurges so
the first one was in the late 60s and
people forget that you had black
panthers occupying buildings armed to
the teeth you had students demanding you
know 50 black professors be studied
every black student be admitted black
studies this is how black studies got
started for example is through demands
by occupi people who occupied the
offices of administ aters so the late
60s we have a number of these things
then there's another awokening which is
in the late ' 80s early '90s that's sort
of probably when you and I we're coming
of age we had political correctness
afrocentrism uh Speech codes for example
hey ho Western Civ has got to go get you
know changing the curriculum purging it
of dead white males that talk in the
late 80s early
90s and then we have another wave which
comes in post 2010 so these are in my
view continuous they
really touch on the same set of ideas
which is really making sacred uh a
couple of things which is identities are
made sacred so I Define for example woke
one sentence definition people always
ask what is the definition of woke well
the definition of woke as I mentioned in
the book is the making sacred of
historically marginalized race gender
and sexual identity groups that's it
that's the one sentence definition and
that is also what I would say
what I would describe as the kind of big
bang of our moral order and out of that
emerges a kind of very fuzzy folk
ideology which says um so these are the
sacred groups um those groups cannot be
offended so anything you say that might
be interpreted by the most sensitive
member of such a group as offensive
marks you out as a a blasphemer you're
profaning the sacred you must be
excommunicated I.E canell the other part
of this is absolute equality in terms of
prestigious positions and resources uh
between these groups so for example you
can't have a race Gap or a gender gap in
terms of the boardroom in terms of
admittance to Elite universities and so
on it's got to be zero so equality plus
emotional safety these are the two
pillars of this ideology but the point I
make is this ideology is not some kind
of system like loan liberalism or even
Marxism that is uh it is more of a
bottomup empathizing rather than a top
down systematizing cognitive thing it's
much more emotional we're attached
concretely to the black civil rights
movement to the indigenous to the LGBT
movements and it's our romanticization
and sympathy for these concrete groups
that provides our meaning and that's
Primary in the system it's not a set of
ideas like Marxism it's actually a set
of attach emotional attachments and so
this is very much emotional and it's
driven from the ground up okay so let me
let me ask you let me ask you some
questions about that okay so I
guess you you you you pulled out two
strings there you you did associate the
system of ideas with liberal
progressivism let's say starting in the
early 20th
century but then you are also stressing
the more emotional side of it uh let's
call it the compassionate side so I I
want to ask you and and you talked about
it as bottomup and emotion
driven so it seems to me that there's
the analysis of the woke
phenomena has revealed a number of
potentially fundamental
causal elements you pointed to Liberal
progressivism and compassion and the
role of emotion let's say other people
have pointed to the role of like a kind
of a metap Marxism so it's the marxists
of course divided the world into victim
and victimizer essentially on economic
grounds the difference now is that that
that same narrative seems to play out
there are victims and there are
victimizers but there is a number of
Dimensions along which that axis of
inequality can reveal itself and you
talked about uh race gender and
sexuality there there's other axes as
well but those are likely the primary
ones and then with regards to the
emotional side this is something I can't
help wondering about and no one is
talking about it and I can understand
why we did a series of studies in that
were published in 2016 which was pretty
much when I left the university so it
never got
completed but we identified a group of
ideas that that hung together
statistically that we called politically
correct
authoritarianism deviated to some degree
from say the liberal Progressive
ethos in that the people who adopted the
set of ideas were perfectly willing to
use compulsion and force that being
perhaps the primary distinction the
predictors that we found that determined
whether or not people adopted those
beliefs were first of all low verbal
intelligence that was a walloping
predictor and the second one was being
female and the third one was having a
female temperament and the fourth one
was having ever taken even one
politically correct course
and so one of the things I'm very
curious about see I've been thinking
that one of the things that we're
seeing is the increased female
domination of the University system
especially in the humanities and the
social sciences and I think there's a
fundamental feminine ethos that's
instinctive that can be made more
sophisticated with genuine education but
that has a proclivity to divide the
world up into predators and infants and
will be tied you if you happen to fall
into the Predator Camp it's very tightly
allied with the victim victimizer
narrative and you know you do point out
in your book that there is a
predilection for women between the ages
of 18 and 34 and this has been shown
everywhere they're way out of lock step
without it with every other demographic
group way more Progressive far more
radically left way more likely to uh
identify for example to even claim that
the Hamas terrorists are victims in some
sense which is just an absolute Miracle
of interpretation so so we've identified
a number of streams there's a Marxist
influence there's a postmodern influence
which we haven't talked about there's a
liberal Progressive influence there's an
emotional influence and and then I don't
know if you have any specific thoughts
about how the increasing female
domination especially of the humanities
and the social sciences plays into that
because that's a major league cultural
revolution the fact that the
universities are dominated for example
administratively as well by females and
so I know that's a hell of a thing to
ask you to talk about right off the bat
but I think that's actually really
interesting and I I think it is a
contributing factor but I just want to
sort of put in a couple of caveats and
the first is we only see this female
effect amongst young people so older
women we don't find greater support for
ccel culture it's very much seems to be
among young women the second thing is if
you were to go back to 1970 for example
women were you know there's a survey
done every year in the US H higher
higher education Research Institute
100,000 freshmen 18yar olds entering
American universities uh in 1970 women
were somewhat more conservative than men
18-year-old women 18-year-old men and
it's really not till 204 we start to see
those 18-year-old women starting to be
more liberal than the men and that's now
widened to about 15 points um and so
something's happened to women in the
recent period That's the first first
point to note so and that's the other
thing is that fire which foundation for
individual rights and expression does an
annual survey in the US 55,000 so
there's a lot of survey data in the book
I I I try and ground this as much as
possible in the data so they ask
questions for example is it okay to
shout down or block somebody from
speaking
and on those questions actually um
especially using violence to to prevent
somebody from speaking women are less
likely than men to support that on
blocking they're about as likely where
women really stand out is should a
speaker come to campus who wants to say
something that might be offensive so for
example uh that says BLM is a hate group
that says trans is a mental disorder
there you see a big gender gap uh and
you see it also amongst Republican women
by the way versus Republican men so it
seems like the attitude the sort of
there's the authoritarian I want to do
violence which is I think not gendered
or it may even be somewhat more male but
there's this protective oh I don't want
anyone's feelings to be hurt and that I
think is more female um so I think there
are some nuances here the what I would
say I me the way I think about it is
women will tend to back up this the the
whatever is the moral order if the moral
order is a woke moral order they'll back
that up if it's a religious or patriotic
moral order they'll be more likely to
back that up whereas men will be more
likely to be the contrarians I think
because it's you know people will talk
about well women are more compassionate
but the point is compassionate to who
like compassionate to that is the point
that's for sure that's the point so
compassionate to the transitioner or the
D transitioner compassionate to the
trans the biological male wants to enter
a woman's shelter or woman's prison or
the women in the prison I mean the
ideology is what tells you who to be
compassionate towards so if we we go
back to the liberal progressives Jane
Adams was relatively pr- lynching or at
least thought that wasn't a bad idea
because she was very very empathetic
towards white women and so she was
willing to accept that there were these
black male predators and buy into that
framing so what I'm just saying is I
think what's happened is an ideology has
crept in and told women who to be
compassionate towards and who not to
care
about are you or someone you know
fighting the battle against cancer for
the last 25 years invita medical centers
have been pioneering personalized
cuttingedge treatment programs for
patients all over the world invita has
been the leader for patients looking for
advanced immunotherapy and genetically
targeted therapies all while focusing on
fewer side effects and better patient
outcomes as a global leader in oncology
care invita is committed to healthcare
freedom for all they've spearheaded a
revolution in employer health insurance
options empowering companies to provide
their employees with access to not only
Top Doctors Hospitals and Technologies
but also the firstof its kind Nationwide
personalized medicine coverage invita is
doing all of this plus offering
significant tax and cost savings full
transparency and Liberation from the
grip of commercial insurance carriers
whether you're a patient in need or a
company looking to break free of
monopolized healthcare insurance invita
could have the solution for you to learn
more about their treatment options visit
inv vita.com
or visit invit health.com to learn more
about their company insurance programs
that's invita spelled e nvi t.com for
treatment options or inv vitah
health.com to learn more about their
company insurance
programs so okay so your point
fundamentally is that I believe is
that the the ideology specifies the
victim victimizer Dimension and
identifies the victim now do you think
do you think it's so when we when when
we when we did our study it was
agreeable I said it was being female and
having a female temperament those were
both predictors we never saw that in any
study we ever did looking at what
predicted beliefs for example if
generally if we controlled for
temperament sex had no effect but that
wasn't the case in this specific
situation which which I thought was
extremely telling and so and it's also
very interesting as you pointed out that
it's young women in particular and I
can't help
as someone you know psychoanalytically
influenced I can't help but think that a
fair chunk of this is misplaced maternal
Instinct I I believe that the young
women who are in by and large childless
in the years when they shouldn't be are
unbelievably sensitive well let's talk
about what happened in 2004 you know you
said that's when women started to shift
their political priorities now I know
from people who've been investigating
this that um Tik Tok is a particularly
pernicious influence especially with
regards to the campus protests that are
occurring right now and The Tick Tock
short videos that are fostering the the
campus protests at least among women
focus on compassion for the war victims
to to to the ultimate degree and they
seem to be extraordinarily effective but
there's a real problem here that needs
to be wrestled with because if it is the
case that young women are differentially
sensitive to a certain kind of
propaganda and they often and they also
increasingly occupy the majority
positions in uh University institutions
for example then we have a whole new
kind of social problem on our hands
because we've never had it's only been
in the last 30 years that we've had the
opportunity to see what female dominant
large institutions would look like right
that's historically unprecedented we
have no idea what pathologies or
advantages those systems might have so
what do you think happened in 2004 like
why did the tide start to turn then so
interpret there's other data s data
series that we can see changing so
political donations shifting towards the
Democrats for example around roughly the
same time now political donations come
for people who are Highly Educated
relatively well off for example I think
what what happens in the US anyway is
you get George W bush who's more of a
populist not an elite style conservative
who's just about tax and spend for
example and I actually think you see you
know he's also to some degree advancing
the agenda the religious right to some
degree I think this populist style
cultural conservatism doesn't work as
well with the elite opinion formers and
so they start to drift away in terms of
political donations and the the if you
like the kind of background the ambiant
noise the mood music that is coming
through the elite institutions the
schools the culture just starts to turn
against uh Republicans and conservatism
for example so I actually think women
are a kind of rof kind of reflect what
is the dominant ethos in a society or at
least the prestige ethos in a society so
if we actually swung the ethos against
wokeism I think women would be in the
Forefront of that uh I don't think
there's anything biological so I I am so
more of a sociologist and a political
scientist so I tend to approach these
things from a kind of Sociology of
emotions perspective which says that
ideas can tell you which emotions to
turn off and which emotions to express
and now of course that's refracted
through like gender so in this case I
think women will just back up and
reinforce the dominant values dominant
ideology of the Elites in a society um
so I'm not as convinced why the elites
why do you think it's okay why would
women specifically back up the dominant
ideology of the elites is do you think
that's a consequence of something like
hypergamy or what's your what's your
theory about that because it's weird if
they're also standing up from the for
The Underdogs is it that they accept the
elite differentiation of who's an
underdog and who's a power monger and
then and and and and then why is that
associated with with youth let's say
with with women I'm trying to
disentangle all that well I think there
are a couple of things I mean one is the
education system uh which I think shifts
in this direction in a big way I mean it
was there in a few radical centers like
Berkeley and the Toronto District School
Board greater London Council so you you
had these crazy places but what's
happened is a scaling up so what my book
talks a lot about is these ideas
actually go back quite a long way but
it's the scaling up now it's in every
school so I did a couple of studies with
the man Manhattan Institute you know 90%
of 18 to 20 year old Americans that I
interviewed you know sent the survey to
said that they had encountered at least
one critical race Theory concept from an
adult in school in in Britain it was
about you know it was a majority as well
not as high but a majority so it's sat
it's hitting saturation level so that's
what women getting in class and then
they see it in the institutions that
maybe in the workplace uh in the
government so they they're seeing this
thing Dei everywhere and so they think
yeah this is the way you have to be a
good moral person and they simply
reinforce those values so I think that
is the biggest driver and I don't think
it's just self-interest so if we take a
question like you know should one of the
questions that I ask is should JK
Rowling be dropped by her publisher uh
amongst young people it's
5050 uh dropper not dropper amongst
anyone over 45 it's in low single digits
so we've got a big issue with young
people um and but but what's really
interesting is that uh if we take this
sort of should JK Rowling be um be
dropped by her publisher question you
know women are considerably more likely
to say that than men now you might say
well shouldn't women be sticking up for
women and women's spaces and female
authors and we no actually so women are
actually going against their own
interest as a tribe by supporting uh the
gender you know the trans activist case
on women's Sports women's shelters
women's prisons you name it doesn't make
any sense from a purely feminist
perspective so I just think they're
reflecting these are the values that
good people are supposed to have and
we're going to reinforce do do you think
do you think okay well it's perfectly
reasonable to suppose that something
like the default young female ethos is
self-sacrifice in relationship to the
marginalized right I mean infants are
marginalized they're danger all the time
they have to be attended to everything
they demand has to be granted to them so
perhaps it's not surprising that women
would sacrifice their own interests in
relationship to the marginalized because
that's actually and so certainly
self-sacrifice is part of what you might
regard as a core in relationship to any
moral ethos the the problem seems to be
that it can be gamed and it it's gamed
so effectively now and then we you also
talked about the fact that the the young
people have been exposed to these
courses so we could flesh that out a
little bit we did find in the study that
I described which was a very good study
by the way it it was only published as a
master's thesis because my research
career came to a rather crashing halt
but the fact that even one course had a
significant effect over IQ and
temperament and sex was telling right so
now I don't know if you know this but
you might know it you know that um in
virtually every state and province in
North America a teacher has to be
certified and that's basically the
faculties of Education have a hammerlock
on that which is appalling as far as I'm
concerned because I don't think there's
a more corrupt branch of Academia than
the faculties of
Education terrible research
counterproductive research whole word
learning self-esteem social emotional
name a stupid fad and the probability
that it came out of an educational
psychologist in a faculty of education
is extremely high do you know that the
the K through2 education system eats up
50% of the state budgets in the United
States so that means that 50% more
sometimes more so that means that since
the
1960s we have handed 50% of the state
budgets to the most woke graduates of
the worst possible faculties we've done
that for four generations and now well
and as you said now in your surveys
you're finding that the vast majority of
students have been exposed to well what
what's essentially I don't I don't know
how to characterize it postmodern metam
Marxist propaganda it's something like
that although you know you're stressing
more the emotional side of it and so
well I guess that all we'll discuss that
a little bit too when we get to your I'm
so interested in discussing your
Solutions because you know I think the
solutions to the universities is to let
them
perish by their own hand because they're
certainly struggling mightily to do so
so but you're more optimistic and so I I
okay so so that's this that's the facts
on the ground with regards to State
budgets 50% of their budgets has been
handed over to these propagandistic
institutions well I think the schools
are critical so one of the things we're
finding for example is that students
largely are formed by the time they come
on campus and a lot of the studies of
University show people's views don't
actually change a great deal between
when they come on step on to campus and
leave the university however so we
really have to focus on the school so
one of the things we found in the the
study that Zack Goldberg and I did was
we looked at how much exposure to
critical race and gender Theory Concepts
students had had uh in high school and
you know we take take for example
somebody who didn't get any exposure to
any of these critical race Concepts like
white privilege systemic racism
unconscious or the gender Concepts many
genders patriarchy for example someone
who got no exposure to that uh is sort
of 50 to 100% less likely to express for
example white guilt think that um you
know whites are racist and mean uh to
favor a racial quotas an affirmative
action all of these things jump 50 to
100% less yes wow and and mindling
that's between somebody having no
Concepts and the maximum of six Concepts
similarly by the way for partisanship
you know someone with a republican
mother uh who is exposed to no Concepts
there's a essentially 60% of them
identify as Republican exposed to six
Concepts it drops to below 30% so one of
the points that I try to make in the
book is that K12 education public
education is absolutely massive and must
become a top priority for certainly
conservative politicians this if you
want to have a hope in the future in
terms of turning this around we've got
to get at K12 education okay so so let
me ask you about that I just saw a study
the other day just a graph of a study
showing across a variety of different
age groups when people believe that the
culture their culture peaked in terms of
Quality Music Entertainment food peace
Etc and the the general proclivity was
for people to focus on the time between
the are about say 15 and 19 and you know
there's a tremendous amount of neural
reorganization that goes on at that
point so there's a big die off of
neurons between two and
four right so you're born with more
neural connections than you ever have
again in your life and a lot of what
happens when you learn is actually
pruning there's a major pruning in late
infancy and then there's a major pruning
in teenage in the teenage years you kind
of die into your adult personality
that's a reasonable way of thinking
about it now people have known for a
long time that if you want to get men
into the military in the proper way you
have to do that when they're young
adults the earlier the better by the
time they're 23 or so like forget it you
can't tribalize them right so that we
and we don't know exactly the critical
period for the establishment of tribal
identity but you're suggesting that
you're research is indicating that it's
actually prior to University you know I
bet it's the same time that people
develop their musical preferences right
right right right well yeah I think I
mean that's such a good a key point that
you make about the neurons and and brain
development kind of ending in a certain
way in the early 20s that tends to
manifest itself I mean a political SCI
like scientist like myself would tend to
look at these as cohort effects so you
kind of your beliefs crystallize to some
extent in your early 20s and you carry
those through life cuz right now I think
there's a complacency amongst a lot of
people who say well you know young
people are woke but they'll grow out of
it you know they'll come back they'll
have kids they'll they'll own a house
and they'll suddenly become conservative
and I think that's quite naive in many
ways I think that U I think that may be
true in terms of self-interest paying
taxes but in terms of these core values
I don't think that's likely and you can
see that by the way with religion so
secularism non-religion started with
young people and they those beliefs were
sticky and they maintained non-religion
through life and now we're seeing record
levels of non- rigos in the US and
Britain for example one of my
contentions is yes there's no question
that we you know woke has kind of peaked
um we've seen a roll back of Dei in
corporations to some extent we've seen
to some extent uh reduced tar so we'll
see about that they're pretty slippery
man just because they don't have the
same name doesn't mean they're not up to
the same tricks exactly but but but be
that as may be that as it may in the New
York Times in the Washington Post
editorializing in favor of free speech
and against you know mandatory diversity
statements what I say is that's true and
I think those senior liberals have rode
back but I think we've got to look at
this in terms of cohort change
generational turnover when the median
voter and the median employee in an
organization is a millennial or a Zoomer
they're going to carry the beliefs they
have with them into midlife and that is
going to change our culture so for
example if if I say here's a question
that we ask
yugov asked to hundreds of thousands of
British uh respondents on its panels uh
do you favor political correctness
because it protects people from
discrimination or do you oppose
political correctness because it stifles
free speech no in the British public
it's sort of 47 to 37 against political
correctness um amongst academics it's
maybe
7520 in favor among social science
Humanities academics young people take
after that they're about two to one in
favor of political correctness and what
I would sort of predict is if we run the
clock forward 20 years the median in
society is going to shift from
essentially being opposed to political
correctness to being supportive of
political correctness so something like
speech codes for example in universities
will have majority support and so I
think we really have to turn this ship
around while we still have a sensible
population because we can't guarantee
that that's always going to be the case
and so that's why I think the schools
changing the culture in schools has to
be so
Central sleep is a foundation for our
mental and physical health in other
words you've got to have a consistent
nighttime routine to function at your
best but if you're struggling with sleep
then you've got to check out Beam Beam
isn't your run-of-the-mill sleep aid
it's a concoction carefully crafted to
help you rest without the grogginess
that often accompanies other sleep
remedies a bunch of us here at the daily
wire count on beam's dream powder to
knock us out and sleep better through
the night so we can show up ready for
work the next day just mix beam dream
into hot water or milk stir or froth and
then enjoy before bedtime then wake up
feeling refreshed without the next day
grogginess caused by other Sleep
Products dream contains a powerful
allnatural blend of RI magnesium
eleanine appenine and melatonin to help
you fall asleep stay asleep and wake up
refreshed and with it now being
available in delicious flavors like
cinnamon cocoa chocolate peanut butter
and mint chip better sleep has never
tasted better and today listeners of
this show can get a special discount on
beam's dream powder get up to 40% off
for a limited time when you go to shop
beam.com / Peterson and use God Peterson
at checkout that's shop
beam.com Peterson and use God Peterson
for up to 40%
off yeah so okay so so you I want to
bring a couple of other issues here
before perhaps we turn to your Solutions
now when we began our conversation you
said that part of this movement was the
establishment of sacred identities and I
just brought that up because you brought
up the religious issue as well and I
know you've done some writing about that
additionally know so there's a variety
of I like the idea of sacred see I think
what I think religion religious ideas
are axiomatic starting points like the
ukian axioms for ukian geometry there's
very very many different forms of
geometry right you just have to switch
the axioms the axioms of a cognitive
system I think the word sacred is
exactly right is that you have to accept
a certain number of things on faith and
then you can build a logical edifice on
top of that maybe even a functionally
logical edifice but there's going to be
aums at the base and so I think that any
assumption for example on the part of
people like Dawkins that we can replace
the religious Enterprise with something
that's purely secular is nonsense I
think what we'll get is a different set
of sacred axioms and you pointed to race
gender and sexuality and so why do you
first of all I want to know what you
think about that and why you use the
term sacred but I'm also curious about
your thoughts with regard to why it was
that when we shed our previous set of
sacred presumptions let's say that it
was race gender and sexuality that
rushed in to fill the void right so why
them why those why those axioms right
well I mean there's a there is a sort of
earlier history which I don't go into as
much in the book for reasons of space so
to some degree uh you know this was
directed against immigrant immigrant
groups were sort of
slightly protected by the liberal
progressives not as Extreme as as race
post 1960s but I think to understand
this we have to go and one of the
reasons I make the argument that this is
about left liberalism is that the Civil
Rights Movement starting in the mid-50s
but really it's in the mid 60s this you
this occurs uh with the Voting Rights
Act and the Civil Rights Act all things
which are are things that I support but
uh as Shelby Steel in his book white
guilt which I recommend to everybody
he's an African-American he grew up in
the South experienes what he called a
dramatic shift almost overnight where
the cultural power goes away from whites
where black people had to kind of
genuflect to to whites to suddenly white
people having to sort of virtue signal
that they are one of the good whites to
black people so the cultural power flows
to black people that doesn't mean
economic power initially but cultural
power that's what he said and in fact
American institutions in order to they
lost their moral legitimacy by admitting
that they engaged in the Sin of racial
discrimination once you admit he says
you give up cultural power now you have
to admit because these were real things
but that loss of cultural power means
that you now have to uh fight for your
moral legitimacy how do you do that
through virtue signaling so you're kind
of virtue signaling that you're one of
the good whites that your institution
still has moral legitimacy so you're
going to have an affirmative action
program for example you're going to have
some kind of racial sensitivity training
which is the precursor to diversity
training so a lot of these things really
begin in the 60s and 70s which is one of
the reason and these are not Marxist
things this isn't Herbert Marza saying
we failed on class we got to move to
identity because they might do the
radical revolution I'm those people were
there don't get me wrong you had rufo is
correct and
Lindsay that at least in terms of the
ideas those ideas were there but really
what drove this you know President
Johnson was an anti-communist you know
he was bombing Vietnam this is not some
kind of a a neo-marxist what this was
really about was kind of virtue
signaling and saying I'm not one of the
bad people and we're one of the good
people so white guilt guilt compassion
for these groups and a certain
exaggerated catastrophizing in fear of
the right of conservatives they're going
to drag us back to Jim Crow back to 1933
Germany that constant jinning up of that
alarmism these are the three elements of
the left liberal stool that are
developed um and so that's kind of the
emphasis so I put the Civil Rights
Movement as kind of the the big bang of
our moral order and it is sort of the
the sort of center of our moral Universe
now once you've got this sacredness
around race that you have to very tiptoe
around black American because you know
you've done wrong and and you feel a bit
guilty and then you sort of can take
that sacredness it's a bit like
Kryptonite and you can wield it and you
can if you're a feminist movement you
can grab a bit of that power and use it
if you are an indigenous movement you
can use it and so and then you can
stretch it so it's now mispronouncing
somebody's name or the moan report 1965
about the black family that becomes a
bit offensive and you have to shove it
right so the stretching it's a bit like
putty you can then stretch it across to
different groups outwards to
microaggressions and this is where all
the power comes from and I think you
know there's another there's well
there's another interesting Dimension
there too that's that's worth thinking
about that's more psychological than
sociological so
the there's a group of personality
disorders that are extraordinarily
resistant to treatment and should have
probably never been medicalized is in my
estimation because they're not
illnesses so antisocial personality
disorder is one of them criminality is
not an illness even though it's
diagnosable the associated pathologies
are borderline personality disorder
which is perhaps the female equivalent
of antisocial personality disorder
although I would argue it's even more
toxic um histrionic personality disorder
narcissistic personality disorder that
kind of fleshes it out now the the in so
those the people in that cluster let's
say they the personality traits they
show are they're ma of ellan so they use
their language to manipulate so if if
someone like that is talking to you the
only thing they're using their words for
is to obtain power over you for their
immediate needs that's it there's
there's no there's no
dialogue there's pure manipulation
they tend to be Psychopathic and so
psychopaths are predators and
parasites they
are um histrionic so prone to high
levels of emotional display especially
negative emotion they're narcissistic
which means they want unearned social
status and just to top it off because
that's not bad enough they have a
proclivity to be sadistic which means
they take pleasure in the undeserved
deserving suffering of others now the
reason I'm bringing this up is because
that group of people
uses claims of victimization to harness
guilt to obtain power so there's a
there's an additional twist here that
that I think is stunningly dangerous and
you see it's tied in with your notion
that the progressive liberals have
enabled the radical see because here's
the
problem if you're empathic and
Progressive you don't believe that
cluster be people
exist but because everyone's a victim
but the problem is they do exist and and
it's in times when that small minority
of people maybe that's 4% something like
that when they get the upper hand and
they do they got the upper hand after
the French Revolution they got the upper
hand after the Russian Revolution it is
no fun for anyone because they're chaos
they they're chaos worshippers their
best means of obtaining power and even
reproductive opportunity is in the
ashes and so I've spent I spent five
years working with Democrats in the US
and it got frustrating and so I stopped
doing it but part of the reason it got
frustrating is because I could never get
any of the ones that I worked with and
that was a lot to say to me when does
the left go too far and I would point
out the dangers of the cluster B
Psychopaths and they just handw W it's
like oh no they don't really mean what
they say they don't mean what they say
when they're talking about equality of
outcome for example camela Harris she
doesn't mean equality of outcome she
just means equality of opportunity and
you you you have it's it is stunning the
degree to which that's an aaic belief of
progressive liberals that that radical
left Fringe doesn't exist or they don't
mean what they say that's Universal I've
literally not talked to one of them who
including Robert Kennedy by the way who
was willing to say for example what you
said in in your book which is that we
better watch out for the demand for
equality of outcome because I do think
that's where the pathology really
manifests itself it's like really you
want equality of outcome do you along
all dimensions and you're going to how
are you going to obtain that exactly
except by force well maybe we want Force
it's like yeah yeah maybe you do yeah so
so well so there's this interplay
between sociology and thought and
psychopathology that that that people
aren't attending to and it's very
dangerous because the other thing that's
terrible is that social media seems to
enable the cluster B types because in
normal conversation they're subject to
the restrictions that face-to-face
interaction carries with it like the
possibility of getting hit for example
but none of that is there on social
media and that enables as far as I could
tell that enables this Psychopathic
manipulation to have essentially free
sway yeah I mean that's really an
interesting set of observations I think
you're right and and I guess we we're
agreeing but from different ends of the
telescope because I think that what's
happening is this large group so in a
university the median academic is
liberal left soft left not farle 50 to
60% of the University uh and this is why
for example by a 2:1 ratio social
science AC mics and Elite universities
support mandatory diversity statements
so this is not something they're being
forced to do by a few crazies but of
course as you say there's a symbiosis be
between the authoritarian left and this
large group of liberal left so my view
is if we could work on at least
convincing some of those liberal
leftists to change course then that will
reduce you know it's like unplugging a
guitar from the amplifier the liberal
left is the amplifier and the radical
left is the guitar player how do we and
and but you make another good point
which I've heard before which is when
does the left go too far the
unwillingness and and there's really a
couple of strands to this and we might
call them equal outcomes diversity is
another and inclusion is another the EDI
triumvirate and I would say that on all
of those Dimensions left liberalism
really has no boundaries so left
liberalism is it is in my view sane on
the economy it believes in a mixed
capitalist economy and so left liberal
is M really emerges as the Victor
through two world wars and the Cold War
as the ideology of sort of the elite
cultural ideology it's not communist
actually I don't think it is communist I
think it believes in a maybe a higher
tax rate perhaps than the free market
right but I'm not really that concerned
about the economy it's on the cultural
side there are really no guardrails at
all it's it's it's just there are we're
not diverse enough we're not inclusive
enough we're not equal enough there's no
bound to that so whenever someone comes
along and says we should be more equal
it's like yes what we have is this
ratcheting um and that's really where I
mean hania's book on affirmative action
in the United States moving to this idea
of well starts out as well we want equal
treatment that's what affirmative action
meant pretty soon it was goals and
timetables then there was disperate
impact well you know if you have a test
like the SAT and certain racial groups
are not represented then that's a kind
of indirect discrimination so what we
can see is this kind of evolutionary
ratcheting now that's quite different
from a neo-marxist takeover of
Institutions a kind of Vanguard March
through the institutions argument which
I think is I'm not as persuaded but I
think there's some of that happening but
I think it's really this sort of
evolving ratcheting left liberalism
because it has no boundaries as you say
when does when is there too much
diversity and we know from the studies
Robert putam for example or
easterly that too much diversity
actually has negative impacts on for
example Economic Development on uh
various kinds of examples trust in your
neighbors and this this is now a this is
a finding I would call a how can you
have trust with how can you have trust
without
cohesiveness right right how the hell
can you manage that yeah but there's no
limits and there's no willingness to
recognize we don't want to maximize
these things we want to optimize them
that is not the way the liberal left
thinks they just think more equality
more diversity more inclusivity now of
course inclusivity means we got to have
speech codes we got to clamp down on
speech which might be offensive so
people don't feel included might damage
their self-esteem so this is getting at
free speech to be to get inclusion and
that and I just don't know self yeah
self-esteem
well I've been watching these
pathologies grow in Psychology for 30
years and the social psychologists in
particular they just they've irritated
the hell out of me for like three
generations and so self-esteem people
still use that word so here's what
self-esteem is self-esteem is trait
neuroticism minus extroversion there's
no such thing as self-esteem it's a
complete bloody lie it has no construct
validity whatsoever it's an index of
your temperamental proclivity to
negative emotion and women have lower
levels of self-esteem because they have
higher levels of neuroticism and that
kicks in at puberty and so this is a
good example of how the educational
psychologists and the social
psychologists have actually perverted
the whole culture because we actually
believe in things that don't exist so
deeply that people use them in their
speech as if they're actual facts
maximizing self-esteem it's like it's
trait neuroticism it's extremely
difficult it's it's it's very much set
temperamentally has a very powerful
genetic what would you say Foundation
neuroticism doesn't differ between boys
and girls it doesn't kick into puberty
it's different between men and women all
around the world and you know so we
can't lower people's self-esteem it
means we're aiming at a Target that
doesn't even exist and we're using
ideological means because we've got our
measurements wrong so all right so so
one of the things that was striking
about your book and and I don't know how
to rectify this apparent Paradox you
make the case that we're we're we've
raised a cohort of kids who've been
thoroughly propagandized in
High School let's say because that looks
like about the place where it's
occurring and your belief is that that's
pretty sticky it's although there'll be
some movement in a conservative
Direction people get more
conscientious as they get older they get
more agreeable they do tilt a bit more
towards conservatism but you believe
that a lot of those ideas will be sticky
and that means that that's going to
dominate let's say in positions of power
10 years down the road but by the same
token you also believe that there's time
to turn the ship around so let's talk
about that you have 12 ideas and I'm
really curious to see you go through
them so well you lectured for us at
Peterson Academy right that's right
that's right yeah right right so that's
one of our answers to the problem and
that's launching by the way at the end
of the month fantastic yeah and it was
very enjoyable experience I I didn't
teach anything particularly
controversial but still um what I would
say is there's really two different
approaches to dealing with the issue I
mean one is what I might call libert
Aran and that's using Mar market-based
Solutions and the other is
interventionist using government-led
Solutions now I actually lean more
towards the second than the first which
may jar against some of the Libertarians
in the audience so for example uh I
think it when it comes to the Battle of
ideas in the media there I think it is
the barriers to entry are quite low you
can set up a podcast you you you know
can have the impact that you're having
that that Joe Rogan is having um but
when we're talking about universities
for Tech firms particularly search
engines there are natural monopolies and
there are sort of market failures so
there are first mover advantages to
being Harvard it's going to be very hard
for Harvard's reputation I know it's
dropped a little but it's going to be
hard for that rank ordering to change a
lot um and so and similarly with school
so the view that we should simply have
uh school choice and that's going to fix
the problem um one of I I I'm sort I
think school choice is great but I don't
think it's going to make much difference
surveys that I've looked at for example
show that kids who go through the
through to private school to parochial
school who are even
homeschooled actually don't differ very
much in their views and in addition the
amount of critical race and gender
theory that they are being exposed to is
relatively similar if you think about
universi even in home schools very very
it's it's a little bit lower but in the
data that I've seen which is the at the
fire Foundation individual rights and
expression and also we also asked the
school questions on our 18 to 20 survey
now we didn't get a ton of variation now
it could be that The Homeschool kids we
got a selection of those homeschool kids
which wasn't representative I don't know
maybe that's the case but well is it a
curricul is it a curriculum issue like
well how do you account for that because
on the face of it that seems I believe
it with the private schools because my
experience with private schools is that
they tend to be as woke as the public
schools maybe not quite as much but
pretty much the homeschool one that
that's more complex but it's not that
easy for PE parents for example to set
up a curriculum and the curricula are
well dominated by the ideology let's say
but how do you make sense of that right
well well I think there are some
differences so on the gender ideology
there's a bit less amongst The
Homeschool um now we don't have a
massive sample but there looks to be
some effect but it's not massive and my
point is you know if you are a really
switched on parent you could send your
kid to a classical school if you have
that option nearby that may make a
difference for you but the number of
parents who are like that is quite small
most of them will just say what school
is going to get my kid ahead into a top
university gets the best results even if
they have a choice and so most kids are
just going to be put through the sort of
indoctrination machine and that's my
concern is not the freedom of a very you
know switched on parent to actually
avoid these things which is important
but it's most of these kids are being
put through the same system system so
we've got to I think get at the public
school system so for example I think
something like what Ronda santz is doing
sort of essentially Banning
Dei um sort of getting indoctrination
out of the schools monitoring that okay
let okay let me ask let me ask you about
that you know because I I really have
mixed feelings about this and I'll I'll
tell you why I like Chris rofa I've
enjoyed talking to him I think him and
DeSantis have done very interesting work
in Florida but I have a concern and the
concern is that once you establish the
precedent that the universities can be
directly can be directed from the top
down by the politicians particularly to
set their curricula straight you set a
vicious precedent and I believe that the
work that rufo is doing in Florida
setting up the new University for
example and pushing back in against Dei
is laudable
partly because all the universities to
speak of are woke with the possible
exception of like Hillsdale and and so
even if there is a risk of overshooting
on the conservative side they're at such
a disadvantage that practically speaking
at the moment that might be necessary
but
like if the universities are incapable
of governing themselves and that would
go along with the faculties of education
and we turn that we we we move that
responsibility up the political
hierarchy to the elected officials we
open the door for Mass intervention in
the education system for ideological
reasons and that's like so I just can't
see that as I see that as a solution
with a lot of attended dangers so I'm
wondering like I said I'm I'm I'm I
understand what rufo is doing and why
and DeSantis as well and I think they're
both sensible people but that doesn't
mean that it'll always be sensible
people doing such things no so I I would
draw a very Stark distinction between
K12 between the school system where
you've got minors who are captive they
have to be there they have to Parrot
back what the teacher says in order to
get a good Mark with the universities
where academics have academic freedom
for example so at University level I
would be opposed to critical race Theory
bands I've taught critical race Theory I
think you've got adults they're choosing
which courses to take now I do think
however that state governments or or the
government has the right to defund not
ban but to defund say well we're not
going to fund this kind of course now
that's a political decision but it's not
to say it's banned you can cross
subsidize that from your more profitable
faculties and I think that will just it
will allow it to be taught If people
really want to take it uh but so I don't
think we this is practical for
universities universities I think
there's a different set of solutions but
I think for the school system it is
perfectly legitimate to say we're going
to have a politically neutral space more
important than that sory I just want to
say one thing which is you have to teach
about the past and the warts slavery
genocide Conquest but I don't think you
should be allowed to teach about
American slavery without teaching about
say indigenous slavery or ottoman
slavery you shouldn't be able to teach
about or Roman slavery or Greek slavery
yeah or stolen land you know the
Americans stealing Land from the
indigenous without talking about the
iqua stealing Land from the hon and the
kamanche committing you know atrocities
against the uh Apache so what I mean is
we need to have a a fully contextualized
discussion that all land is stolen land
in a way and that because I think part
of what the problem is you know 70% of
of you know 18 to 24s in the United
States believe that you know um the
native peoples quote unquote the Native
Americans lived in peace and Harmony
prior to the arrival of the Europeans
right so I this is exactly the problems
we have a very all wise stewards of
Nature and everything was peaceful and
harmonious yeah right Jean sh rouso 101
it's so pathetic yeah so I think that
kind of really that sort of attempt to
forge the curriculum and now if you look
historically Canada the US Australia
Britain conservative parties have tried
and failed they've essentially been
outdistanced by the education
establishment time and time again on
this stuff that's going to have to
change they're going to have to get hold
of the curriculum and insist on a
balanced curriculum and political
neutrality Britain has a law on the
books that schools cannot politically
indoctrinate but what they do is they
say well critical race theory is not
political they get around that yeah
right so so so then okay so that begs
the next well that begs the next
question it's like once the institutions
that we're discussing the faculties of
Education let's say once they're
universally corrupted who the hell has
the wisdom or the time in order to
manage something like curricular
analysis you know like I went to the
Republican Governor's association
meeting which was an interesting thing
to do I did that last year and one of
the things that really struck me and
kind of strikes me in general about the
Republicans it was a rather dull meeting
um they were trying to appeal to their
donors so I expected a bit more spice
but it was dull in a kind of competent
administrative manner so the governors
would get up and they would talk about
what were essentially local micro
initiatives that were sensible and
practical but they weren't the sort of
cultural transformation Vision that's
necessary for people to sit down and say
okay well the faculties of Education are
propagandizing what do we want our
children to learn like who in the rufo
is an exception to this maybe but he's a
singular sort of person it's I don't
see
widely you know I spent a lot of time
talking to political people all across
North American it isn't obvious to me
that I see anywhere the kind of
expertise or even the time that's
available to manage such a thing so how
do you how do you envision that
happening well I think there are groups
so the National associ Association of
Scholars has model curriculum Civics
curriculum that they're developing some
of the think tanks Manhattan Institute
as well um so there are now model
curricula and Britain history reclaimed
is is working on this so we we actually
have got model curricula that say
conservative governments could adopt
they have to have the fight with the
educational establishment which by the
way they have had and lost now you look
at for example DeSantis the the
African-American the AP for example I
don't know if you recall where DeSantis
rejected the um the AP for
African-American studies was filled with
critical race Theory forced the critical
race Theory to come out of that that's
an example of what I'm talking about is
you actually have to get into the weeds
of this and you have to insist and you
have to do inspection you have to
mainstream it into the inspection regime
all this very boring technocratic
bureaucratic stuff I I just think so
it's a bit I use the analogy of Elon
Musk taking over Twitter had so much
more of an effect than gab parlor you
know those are those are important to
have these alternatives are important
but I just think we're going to have to
get our hands dirty get into the weeds
of the details of the curriculum and
insist on a balanced curricul and
actually have that
fight if you're always trying to stay
healthy while on the go if you're on the
lookout for products to boost your
immune strength and gut health you need
to check out Arma armra is the gift that
keeps on giving it'll help strengthen
your skin lungs and gut barriers
optimize your microbiome and activate
cellular performance to revive whole
body Health armor products are not just
effective they're also your trusted
companions they're clean safe and have a
solid foundation of extensive research
manufact factured under the most
stringent testing and quality standards
in cgmp and FDA certified facilities
armor is a brand you can rely on every
day chemicals pollutants pathogens and
processed ingredients pose a threat to
our mental and physical well-being the
need for protection is more pressing
than ever if you want to give armor a
try they have a special offer for
Jordan's listeners right now you'll
receive 15% off your first order go to
tr arm.com Jordan or enter Jordan
checkout for 15% off that's TR r y
rm.com Jordan TR arm.com Jordan or enter
code Jordan
checkout okay okay well let's fair
enough I'm going to point out a couple
of problems again it's not because I
don't agree with you it's just like you
said or implied at least the devil's in
the details I mean the person who took
over Twitter that was Elon Musk and he's
a complete bloody monster and he's run
many diff difficult corporations and
done impossible things and so he's like
there's one guy like that and he fired
what 80% of the Twitter staff and
nothing happened except the place got
better now the Pito distribution for
large corporations or large Enterprises
kicks in very viciously and so the Pito
distribution uh what would you say uh
mathematical equations indicate that the
square root of the number of people in a
given organization do have the work and
so if there's
10,000 educational bureaucrats then 100
of them do half the work and that
basically means you could fire 80% of
them and if the whole place is corrupt
you probably have to and like I just
can't see how the hell the conservatives
are going to manage that because it
could easily be that 80% of teachers
need to go now I know there are places
like the act and Academy and so forth
that are setting up educational
institutions where teachers for example
are much less necessary because the
students take a lot of the work on their
own and they're and I know I understand
as you pointed out that there are places
that are producing model curricula but I
just I've talked to Republican Governors
for example whove tried to take on the
teachers unions in their own States and
you know failed because the well because
they have 50% of the state budgets and
they're insanely powerful they're much
more powerful generally speaking than
the governors are so right well so so
you talk about Florida and Florida is a
good model but that's one state you know
and so so lay out some more of your
ideas for how these things might change
well I do think so it's already having
an effect in Florida I mean the chilling
effect on the CR the CRT banss and those
are being now I think there are you know
many red States and I I've lost track of
the number it might be approaching
25 that are rolling this out and
actually there is compliance it's not
perfect but I think if the Republican
party in these states is serious it will
invest political capital and it will
demand accountability it will ask people
to sort of in you know what are the
inspections saying uh you know you have
to report to the legislature on progress
and I actually think that process first
because I also think most teachers are I
think a lot of teachers are flexible and
actually teachers are not quite as
leftwing believe it or not as academics
so there there is actually I think more
receptivity now you also need to open up
new avenues into the profession so you
don't have to require an education
degree there's all things things that
that that you need to do um so there's a
whole set of things we can do as liberal
democracies likewise with the government
getting uh CRT and Dei out of government
is something I think we can do I think
you can so through political
appointments you have to you're probably
going to have to fire some people you
might have to set up new agencies so on
the UK we have the higher education
freedom of speech act where there is a
new 10 person academic freedom
directorate that's a new institution now
I actually think that's a good thing now
it could be that labor comes in and
defangs it fine I mean perhaps to some
degree this becomes a matter of
political contestation because really
what all of this gets down to is the
only
institution that the sensible majority
on the cultural side can control is the
elected government that is the only
institution that we have we don't we we
haven't got the schools the universities
we haven't got the Civil Service the
quangos what we actually need to do is
to use elected government to reform all
of these devolved bodies and also
institutions relying on public money
we're not trying to indoctrinate them
our goal is political neutrality and
balance that's it I think that has to be
the goal that's maybe where I disagree a
bit with rufo and some others who want
to put in a different ethos based on
Christianity or yuram hone believe I I
don't believe that I believe we can have
political neutrality and actually you
can chill activists within the academic
sector okay so let me ask you about let
me ask you about that because the
postmodern rejoiner to your claim is
that well you claim that your anti- Dei
stance let's say is politically neutral
or that there's even such a thing as
political neutrality but really all
you're trying to do is uh what would you
call it sneak in an alternative ethos of
power to replace the one that is
highlighting the victimized and the
marginalized and you know pushing things
back 50 years into the hands of like
white Christian conservatives you know
because for the postmodernist there's no
neutrality there's only a battleground
of power that's it and they believe that
and they believe it technically and
certainly the radical leftists not only
believe that but Revel in it because it
allows them to use power with no guilt
and so why on what grounds are you
convinced that the claim that
institutional neutrality for example
could be instituted and that it actually
constitutes neutrality what's your
philosophical justification for that
claim
well philosophically you know what I
approach the whole book with is this
idea of human flourishing a kind of
utilitarian argument that says um we
want to have a certain amount of
equality a certain amount of diversity a
certain amount of inclusion but only the
amount that is optimal to maximize human
flourishing in the system I think we've
overshot on those three and we have to
sort of move it back not back to where
it was in 1950 but back a little bit
further um and so the idea there is
institutional neutral it is critical for
people to have trust in the system now
we already have for example the Civil
Service in Britain is supposed to be
neutral we already have this aspiration
and I think a lot of people even even
left liberals will actually be convinced
by they're not postmodern in in being
radically cynical uh the way that I mean
some of them are but I think many people
will be one over if you say look what we
want is neutrality you know you've
talked about you know American slavery
we want to talk about ottoman slavery I
think that making that argument can win
over some people uh and I think a
neutrality argument is more winnable
than to say we're going to replace your
ethos of woke with our e ethos of public
religion to to to use Hon's argument
right okay so you still think that
there's enough of a Centrist consensus
around what neutrality constitutes for
that to still be a compelling argument
to people even even the left the LI more
liberal Progressive types well you'd
think at least they'd be self-interested
enough to understand that
neutrality throughout sequential
elections might be a held lot better
than Domination by the radical
conservative right which is certainly a
possibility and that's certainly
something that's emerging in Europe and
could easily well who knows how things
will play out but it's popping up its
head in many many places in Europe right
the last country to go was the
Netherlands so that's what Sweden the
Netherlands Italy most of Eastern Europe
like this is starting to happened very
very widely and could certainly continue
so neutrality you'd think across
sequential elections would be the best
policy for everybody if we had enough of
a consensus to Define it well I'd also
say too that right now the public if you
take a look and I've done surveys in the
US Britain and Canada it's the public in
all three societies leans about two to
one against what I would call the woke
position and that could be teaching kids
that Canada is a racist country or um
you know that there are many G or
whatever so it's roughly two to one
against across 50 questions let's say in
a democracy the Democracy gets to set
the curriculum I think the majority of
the population would be on board the
idea of political neutrality and balance
as they see it and I think we have the
numbers to to Institute that now and one
of my pleas in terms of the 12-point
plan is that the conservative
politicians really need to upgrade the
focus on culture uh because you have a
two to1 yeah a two to1 majority
these are clear wedge issues they divide
the left and they unite the right a
question like you know should Winston
Churchill statue be removed from
Parliament Square you know if you take
conservative voters they are you know
overwhelmingly strongly opposed to that
if you take labor and and green voters
um and liberal Democrats they're kind of
splintered some are strongly in favor
but many are not uh so these are obvious
issues to go after why haven't conserv
atives gone after them because they're
scared of being accused of being a
racist I'll give you another example
which is affirmative action red states
only four red states have got bans on
affirmative action 13 have bans on
abortion now abortion is a relatively
unpop and bans on abortion are
relatively unpopular they may have a
one-third support across the US
population bans on affirmative action
might have a 2third support and yet
there's very little of it in red States
what how do we explain that well we
explain it first of all by the fact that
this issue has not been important enough
for conservative politicians hanana does
a good job of talking about that and
also that the abortion Lobby the gun
lobby they're very organized you know
they put pressure on Republican
politicians between elections the
anti-affirmative action Lobby is totally
disorganized and cannot hold
conservative politicians feet to the
fire if they do nothing about it that
has to change that organization between
elections we have to be putting much
more pressure on our politicians to
raise the importance of this issue and
to deliver on that issue now that may be
changing well I've seen in I've seen in
Canada well I talked to a lot of
conservative politicians in Canada and a
fair number in the US although I think
the proclivity for this is much more
Market in Canada because it's more left
leaning um 10 years ago the typical
conservative was terrified in Canada
saying anything that's smacked of social
conservatism and there was a very
specific reason for that and the reason
was if any one of them came out publicly
and said anything socially Conservative
then the woke Psychopathic mob would
take them out on social media like as an
individual right they'd be targeted and
destroyed and that was very effective
and the conservatives who are also very
guilt prone like that's the other thing
too is that the left has this radicals
have this tremendous Advantage because
especially the really Psychopathic ones
because conservatives feel guilt but
radical leftist Psychopaths feel none
and they can use guilt as a weapon and
conservatives are very sensitive to that
so you get that combination of clear
threat because it is no fun to be mobbed
it's really really hard on people it
drives them to not only to distraction
but often to Suicide you lose your job
you lose your friends you lose your
reputation no one has enough courage to
stand up beside you the radicals had the
conservatives cowed completely and so
and affirmative action is a real
Touchstone for that because to even
question it well it's changed to some
degree now not that much but to even
question it meant you're the probability
that you could be accused of being a
racist was like super high it's going to
happen
inantly right but I think this is where
you have what political scientists would
call an Everton window of acceptable
debate right and if you're outside that
window you can be cancelled or but you
can be attacked by the Press but what
we've actually seen in Europe and in the
US is you take an issue like immigration
that was a
taboo in many European societies that's
no longer a taboo so Sweden for example
you could not the the sort of
establishment conservative party try to
one of the ministers tried to raise
levels of immigration as an issue in
Sweden in 2014 he was attacked and the
media as a racist okay he's shut down
but then what that means is the next
year the Sweden Democrats swoop in on 12
and a half and of course they've reached
25% us Trump was the only candidate of
17 primary candidates in 20156 to make
the Border a signature issue he was
willing to go there now once you break
the taboo all of a sudden as in Sweden
now all the parties are talking about
immigration and the taboo is it's not
gone entirely but the Everton window is
open quite a bit and so in Canada
likewise we're going to need that now
we've seen it a bit on the gender issue
Premier higs and New Brunswick we've
seen Scott Mo and saskat that's the
beginning of an opening up of a convers
you need a brave politician like higs to
break the ice the next thing that we
need to see from a Canadian politician
is to break the ice on this hoax of the
mass Graves that has somebody has to
sort of say The Emperor's New Clothes on
this thing because there is no evidence
of this and it underpins an entire
garment rening attack on National
History on the founders of Canada Etc
now who is going to take who's going to
throw the first stone in that I don't
know but it has to happen and I think I
I would argue that in fact the
population will follow you cuz for
example in the surveys I've done by two
to one Canadians do not want Sir John A
McDonald statues removed they support
the idea yes he was a creature of his
time no this idea that that the
residential schools are genocide Etc I
mean this I just think somebody needs to
go after that have you had a chance to
talk to Pierre POV the new leader of the
conservative party in Canada I haven't
um I'm a little concerned I mean I I
certainly think obviously that Trudeau
was was a disaster for all the issues
we're talking about so uh but I'm
worried that paf has only largely talked
about economics and only reluctantly
about any cultural issues now I get it
he's well ahead in the polls why
endanger that prior priorities to get
there is some of that yeah my sense is
though you know my my sense is in Canada
that the conservatives are a lot
different lot than they 15 years ago
like Daniel Smith has a spine Scott Mo
has a spine higs has a spine so does POV
there POV isn't pushing the cultural
issues at the moment and I think it's
partly because and I think this is
actually wisdom to some degree if your
opponent is busy slaughtering himself
you might as well just stand and watch
well seriously there's not you know
there's no sense causing a tremendous
amount of trouble while that's occurring
um but the conservatives are much less
intimidated in Canada than they were 15
years ago like a lot and they'll
certainly make an issue of the sorts of
things that we've been discussing in a
way that wouldn't have been conceivable
in say
2010 I think that's right I yeah um I I
I think that it's Al but I do think it's
important for the Grassroots to to some
degree hold PV to account when he's in
office if for example he backtracks on
defunding the CBC if he doesn't do
anything say anything on immigration on
culture wars I think that you know and
my worry I having seen it in Britain
where the conservative government came
in with the support of brexit Voters and
essentially did not deliver hoping that
that the voters wouldn't notice so
that's my worry but I don't know is the
honest answer I don't know him or his
cabinet so let me let me ask you a more
personal question maybe um and then I'll
see if there's some anything else you
want to talk about on the YouTube side
of this discussion does it like would
you characterize yourself politically
where do you characterize yourself
politically first of all that's the
first Ian I think that you know I don't
think I'm down the so I think
economically I'm sort of Centrist you
know I have many Centrist views I
believe in the welfare state I actually
think tackling climate change is
actually a worthwhile thing to to a
degree and using nuclear and using a
whole bunch of other on however on the
cultural side I think I'm very much a
conservative and I think we we are in
danger of losing free speech and Truth
we're in danger of losing National
cohesion uh and and so in a whole series
of issues i' I'd say I'd probably lean
conservative for that reason okay is
that a surprise to you I mean you're a
rare academic right I mean there there
it's not like there's no people like you
and there are a lot more of them than
there used to be you know I'm in touch
regularly with a group that we
communicate by email that's got like 100
people on it and there's there's more
people who've been well many of them
kind of
slipped surprisingly into the
conservative Camp over years but it's
rare it's still comparatively rare and
and it's particularly rare in your field
I would say although that's also the
case in mine so like why is that the
case with you and and how did you come
to these conclusions well how did you
manage any degree of success while
having
them yeah it's a tough one as you
probably know yourself you know I mean
we anyone right of Center is 5% perhaps
in in the soft social sciences um and
that's what the surveys seem to show uh
now I haven't changed my views really U
not really I can't think of any major
change that I've had in my views since I
was in my 20s um but yeah you keep your
head down you write you sort of write
things that are not controversial that
are in fields that are not political um
and and that's what I did for many years
until about 2018 or thereabouts I was a
full Professor I was head of Department
I I felt that I kind of did what I'd
want wanted to do in terms of publishing
I published in the major university
presses and journals and and so I just
thought Now's the Time to actually you
know with the populist moment and the
rise of brexit and Trump I sort of you
know I was talking about why I think
these things happened um in a different
way and I was also more openly critical
of the social justice movement and that
is really what got me under attack from
Twitter mobs open letters internal
investigations right which are prompted
by people inside the university and
outside who simply have to bombard your
Twitter feed and and you know put in a a
complaint against you and then you have
to yeah okay well I think what we'll do
and I'll let everybody watching and
listening know this too I I want to talk
to you for another half an hour on the
daily wire side unless let's not step
into what happened to you personally
let's do that on the daily wire side and
I guess what I would like to do um is
there are there other issues that you're
working on now or that are gerain to
this new book that you would like to
close with um let's say are are there
some other things we haven't talked
about that you'd really like to bring to
the attention of people on the YouTube
side well I I just say a couple of
things I mean first is that I think that
uh woke and cancel culture are connected
to many different issues that are very
pressing to a lot of Voters um and one
of them is you know you look the
populist right is going to do very well
in Europe in the European elections
coming up in a couple of weeks or there
about
this is really a so so it's not just you
know about free speech and Truth when we
talk about ccell culture it is
Downstream effects if you can't talk
about immigration you're not going to
get control of your border you're not
going to get to you're not going to be
able to deport people and then you're
going to have populist rising up because
the mainstream won't touch it I use the
example of Soviet department store you
can only sell black pants well then
you're going to have somebody popping up
and selling blue GS so if the mainstream
parties are only selling one immigration
policy then the political entrepreneur
which is going to be ukip or the Sweden
Democrats or Donald Trump is going to
pop up so if you care about polarization
and populism you have to have free
speech which means we have to deal with
woke and I should just say one other
thing which is I'm trying to both with
this book and which with a new course
that I've run this year on it's an open
online course on woke trying to get
people to understand what's What's led
to this problem and why so many of the
things that we we argue about and talk
about crime Health Care education
they're Downstream of this so we can't
one of the things that I fear is that
the culture wars get siloed into this
narrow campus bubble and people think
it's a minor thing and they forget that
it has many many effects on a lot of
issues that a lot of voters care a lot
about so I just think it's a much bigger
thing in a way it's the future of our
civilization it's not just a little
culture War yeah right exactly well
that's the thing is you got to see what
the source is and it's well it certainly
seems that the sources the source of
much of the trouble is well I think it's
the higher education system and then
it's the more specifically the
ideologies that have gripped the higher
education system that people have
allowed to grip it I suppose and also
enabled and so yes you're absolutely
right is in my opinion that it isn't
about economics with the culture War
being a
distraction that's it's partly too you
know one of the things I've come to
deeply understand that wealth is a
consequence of an ethos it's not a
consequence of Natural Resources in fact
the natural resource curse is one of the
economic facts that seems to disprove
that entirely countries that are rich in
natural resources are often in fact
statistically more often not likely to
be rich because they become corrupt for
example you need an ethos and an ethos
makes you wealthy and that's what
happened in Japan for example and the
default interaction between between
Japanese citizens is one of trust and
honesty and so Japan can be filthy rich
in the absence of any natural resources
at all and so there's no culture War
independent of Economics that's foolish
is if we get the culture war wrong we're
going to destroy the economic system and
that's actually the stated goal of many
of the real deep radicals and so that
actually should come as no surprise to
anyone who's listening and so this and I
think you're right in in in consequence
about the Libertarians it's like
you need a certain kind of cultural
consensus so that less government is
even an issue and it's not going to be
less government it's going to be better
distributed responsibility and that's
not the same thing at all like right
because the libertarian ethos only works
when you have a citizenry that's capable
of picking up governance on their own to
take that responsibility then
libertarianism is fine but if the
culture War has destroyed that
responsible ethos less government is not
a solution it just lets the IDE
ideologues
win well exactly I mean this is sort of
a point to TUV made as well is that that
sort of layer of Civic trust is is vital
for the functioning of Freedom if we
have more
polarization polarization means you
can't enact the right economic policies
because each party is sort of wrapping
that policy into its ideology people
can't be rational and detached right and
and this is one of the things I think
that the left loses sight of is that if
you try and infiltrate institutions and
politicize them Civil Service schools
corporations you are actually going to
cause half the citizenry to lose trust
in those institutions and therefore if
without trust I mean as putam putnam's
work a lot of people have done work on
the salutary effect of Trust on
entrepreneurship and innovation without
that basis of trust if that's being torn
apart as you say by culture Wars and
polarization and and so I just I'm
trying to appeal to the sane left to say
look you cannot just conduct your
politics by infiltrating institutions
you could if you want to win that battle
in the court of public opinion that's
fine but to try and do it
surreptitiously by infiltration is
actually eroding the trust in society
and I and and by the way you can see it
on the right too the right has kind of
won over more positions on the Supreme
Court so what do we see the left's trust
in the Supreme Court as an institution
Falls and that's what happens when you
politicize and so I just think we've got
to solve and and when people say it's
just a little culture war no these are
critical issues that we have got to to
come to a solution on if we want to
overcome this
polarization yeah yeah all right sir for
everyone watching and listening I'm
going to continue this conversation on
The Daily wire side I'm I'm going to
talk to Eric more about what happened to
him personally with regard to his
experience with cancel culture because
well these things are made much more
realistic when they're nailed down to to
actual experience and so if you'd be
willing to join us there please feel
welcome and invited to do so thank you
very much sir be nice to talk to you
again at some point I'd like to delve
into the uh
the the the issue of fundamentals like
your take is something like as far as I
can tell that there's still enough
Centrist consensus so that we can adopt
this stance of neutrality and use that
as a uh what would you say as a
conceptual structure to push back
against the woke nonsense and you know
that
seems plausible to me possibly there
might be enough trust left for that I'd
like to have a conversation with you at
some point about what the sacred
fundamentals perhaps actually have to be
you know what are the ones that are
lurking underneath that residual
consensus because I think you can be UT
utilitarian when when the implicit
consensus exists but the question is you
know are we so fractionated that that's
not the case anymore hopefully not yeah
yeah you I I I think that we do have to
sort of try and just as we fought the
Cold War it was economic utilitarianism
and well-being against economic
socialism what we have now is we've got
cultural socialism and we need that sort
of cultural wealth perspective it's a
bit like the the economists always talk
about the p
the more equally you cut it up the more
it shrinks or the less it grows uh so
you need an optimal balance between
equality redistribution and growth I
think like likewise with the culture we
have to have a conversation about the
more we push equal outcomes by race and
gender and other things the more that
cultural pie isn't going to grow so you
may maybe a white man can't write about
a black woman and that impoverishes
literature you can't borrow that's
cultural appropriate I mean the so
essentially we get a poorer culture the
more we push cultural socialism and so
again I think we need this sort of New
Vision which is really about human
flourishing and overcoming cultural
socialism we'll have some concern with
equality as we did with economic
equality but it's not going to dominate
the whole thing right now I feel we've
got cultural socialism unbounded with no
guardrails and that's something that
we're going to have to address all right
sir thank you everybody for watching and
listening um as I mentioned a few
minutes ago I'm going to continue
talking to Dr Kaufman on The Daily wire
side please feel free to join us there
to the film crew here in Northern
Alberta thank you very much for your
help where are you Eric at the moment um
I'm in London um actually you're in
London yeah and you're well you're in
Northern Al whereabouts in Northern
Alberta um a little bit I'm in a town
called Fairview which is near near Grand
prair it's about 400 miles north of
Edmonton yeah right I I lived in Peace
River for a year I think I mentioned
that oh okay so you know you know
exactly where it is all right all right
sir well thank you very much and uh yeah
and good luck with your book and and
with your continued efforts and and uh
thank you to everyone watching and
listening thanks Jordan
[Music]